Add privacy primer (#44877)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/privacy/privacy_primer/index.md

---
title: Privacy primer
slug: Web/Privacy/Privacy_primer
page-type: guide
sidebar: privacy
---

This guide is an introduction to privacy for web developers. It provides an overview of the principles that a website needs to follow in order to respect the privacy of its users.

> It is largely based on the principles listed in the [W3C Privacy Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/) statement, but unlike that document, this guide covers only principles that apply to web developers, not those that apply to browser developers or standards designers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is largely based on the principles listed in the [W3C Privacy Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/) statement. However, unlike that document, this guide covers only principles that apply to web developers, not those that apply to browser engineers or standards designers.
```

Maybe? I definitely think "developers" -> "engineers" is a good idea, to cut down on using "developers" twice.

Author: The repetition is intentional here, because it's emphasizing that it's the modifier that's different between the two categories, like if you said "do you want a hot drink or a cold drink" it would be weird to avoid repetition by saying "do you want a hot drink or a cold beverage".

Reviewer: I'm not sure that's quite the same. Another consideration is that (at least in my experience), "browser engineer" is a more common turn of phrase than "browser developer". But I don't think it's particularly important either way.

It's split into two main sections:

- [Working with a user's personal data](#working_with_personal_data)
- [User recognition and tracking](#user_recognition_and_tracking)

## Working with personal data

> Websites often have a legitimate need to collect and process a user's personal data. To be respectful of a user's privacy, a website must align the data they collect and the way they use it with the user's intentions. That is, they should only collect data that the user intends to share, and they should only use it in the way that the user intends for it to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Websites often have a legitimate need to collect and process a user's personal data. To be respectful of a user's privacy, a website must align the data they collect and the way they use it with the user's expectations. That is, they should collect only data the user intends to share, and use it only as the user expects.
```

My reasoning: "...use it with the user's intentions" comes off as a little weird to me — the user doesn't really intend to share _any_ data when visiting a website. However, they might choose to share some data when told why that's needed, or what the end benefit is. A good website is one that always aligns with the user's expectations after that point. 

Maybe I'm overthinking this...not that big a deal.

Author: Maybe? I think "intention" and "intends" emphasizes the user's agency here. "Expectations" feels passive, and of course if the user expects that a website will sell their data to anyone who offers to buy it (i.e. they have low expectations of a website), then this suggests that doing so is respectful of the user's privacy, when it surely isn't.

> the user doesn't really intend to share any data when visiting a website

They surely do, don't they? I mean say I create an account with my library, and it asks me what kind of books I like, so it can give me recommendations. If I provide that, don't I intend to share it with them?

Reviewer: Well, I think a user goes to a website with the intention of using the service the website provides (e.g., booking a holiday), not sharing some data. This is what I am getting at with "intention" versus "expectation.

But again, I don't think this is a huge issue either way.

### Personal data

Personal data is defined in the [General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)](https://gdpr.eu/article-4-definitions/) as:

> any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person

> This includes data that can be directly used to identify a person, such as a name, social security number, date of birth, or address. It also includes information that is associated with a person, such as medical, financial, or employment information.

Reviewer: Other identifying information classes that I think are worth mentioning here:

- Physical attributes such as height, eye color, gender, whether they wear glasses...
- Societal/social identifiers such as religion, sexuality, political affiliation...

This second category is particularly important, due to it being used for discriminatory purposes when information is leaked/used by bad actors.

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/48c8747e1fcee7f03390383b5170e7affa5e4902

Reviewer: Perfect.

### Requesting personal data

> Websites should collect only personal data that the user wishes to provide, and collect only the data they they actually need. For example, a shopping site might allow people to make purchases without creating an account: this means the site doesn't collect as much personal data, and also reduces friction for shoppers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Websites should collect only personal data that the user wishes to provide, and collect only the data that they actually need. For example, a shopping site might allow people to make purchases without creating an account: this means the site doesn't collect as much personal data, and also reduces friction for shoppers.
```

When requesting data, websites should clearly explain what they are asking for and how it will be used.

> Web developers should design the user interface that requests data so as to learn the user's true intent. This means that user interfaces should not attempt to manipulate users into sharing more data than they really intend to, for example by making it easier to share data than not to share it, or by asking users to agree to terms that they could not be expected to understand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Web developers should design the user interface that requests data so they can learn the user's true intent. This means that user interfaces should not attempt to manipulate users into sharing more data than they really intend to, for example by making it easier to share data than not to share it, or by asking users to agree to terms that they could not be expected to understand.
```

> Web developers should design the user interface that requests data so as to learn the user's true intent. This means that user interfaces should not attempt to manipulate users into sharing more data than they really intend to, for example by making it easier to share data than not to share it, or by asking users to agree to terms that they could not be expected to understand.

Reviewer: This first sentence is a bit hard to grok. Maybe

```suggestion
Web developers should design user interfaces that request data to be honest, straightforward, and align with the user's true intent. This means that user interfaces should not attempt to manipulate users into sharing more data than intended, for example by making it easier to share data than not to share it, or by asking users to agree to terms that they could not be expected to understand.
```

Author: I'm not sure about this. Happy to think of new wording. But what I want to get across is the idea that there is such a thing as the user's "true intent", and it should be the job of the UI to _discover_ that, without trying to manipulate users. I don't think the UI itself aligns with their intent. It attempts to discover their intent.

```suggestion
Web developers should design the user interface that honestly attempts to discover the user's true intent. This means that user interfaces should not attempt to manipulate users into sharing more data than the user really intend to, for example by making it easier to share data than not to share it, or by asking users to agree to terms that they could not be expected to understand.
```

? idk if that is better

Reviewer: Ah, this helps me to understand what you are getting at. I think the grammar could still use a little work, perhaps:

"Web developers should design user interfaces that honestly attempt to discover the user's true intent."

Author: sure! -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/abc859456980c8dba4e0b49c7055c86940fca438

### Using personal data

Websites should use personal data only for the purposes they specified when requesting it.

> If possible, before sites use personal data, they should process it in such a way that individual users are not identifiable: this process is called _de-identification_.

Reviewer: Maybe also mention that when using data, you should try to infer trends and patterns from (and share, if necessary) only aggregated data rather than using individual data points, to make it harder to identify individuals.

Reviewer: Another way to reduce data collection requirements is to infer data from, say, the user's previous purchases or other historic trends, rather than asking them for additional data.

Author: > Another way to reduce data collection requirements is to infer data from, say, the user's previous purchases ... rather than asking them for additional data.

hmm, isn't that personal data collection as well? Just because it can be silently collected rather than having to ask the user.

Author: > Maybe also mention that when using data, you should try to infer trends and patterns from (and share, if necessary) only aggregated data rather than using individual data points, to make it harder to identify individuals.

As I read it this is really an example of "de-identification" rather than an additional thing, but it's a helpful example, so: https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/88f9996d492d7060d30091363e15b7ee11dbe2ed.

Reviewer: The addition looks good; nice work.

> hmm, isn't that personal data collection as well? Just because it can be silently collected rather than having to ask the user.

I'd argue that it is using data you already have, rather than explicitly collecting more data, which has got to be a good thing for the user. But again, only a minor point really.

Websites should delete personal data once they no longer need it.

### Allowing users to manage their data

Websites should allow users to manage the personal data that they have provided. This includes the ability to:

- Access, correct, export, and delete any stored personal data.
- Withdraw any consent that they have given about how their data should be used.

Websites should make it as easy for users to perform these actions as it is for them to share their data in the first place. That is, websites should not make it easy for users to share data but hard for them to delete it.

Websites should not retaliate against users who exercise these rights. For example, if a user withdraws consent to the use of their data, and the website then denies access to a service that does not depend on that data, this could be considered retaliation.

### Publishing a privacy policy

> Websites should publish a privacy policy, to help users understand how the site will use their data. The policy should describe:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Websites should publish a privacy policy to help users understand how the site will use their data. The policy should describe:
```

- What personal data the site collects.
- How the data will be used.

> - Steps the site takes to protect data from unauthorised access.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Steps the site takes to protect data from unauthorized access.
```

- Any third parties with which the site will share the data, including a declaration that the site will ask for user consent before sharing.
- The duration for which the site will keep the data before it is deleted.
- How the user can view and manage their data.

## User recognition and tracking

> User recognition is the act of realising that an identity belongs to the same person as some other identity which was observed at some other time. Websites often have a legitimate need to recognize users. For example, a library website needs to be able to show the user which books they have checked out, and to do this they need to know that this user is the same user who checked out those books. Websites typically use cookies to implement this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User recognition is the act of realizing that an identity belongs to the same person as some other identity which was observed at some other time. Websites often have a legitimate need to recognize users. For example, a library website needs to be able to show the user which books they have checked out, and to do this they need to know that this user is the same user who checked out those books. Websites typically use cookies to implement this.
```

> User recognition is the act of realising that an identity belongs to the same person as some other identity which was observed at some other time. Websites often have a legitimate need to recognize users. For example, a library website needs to be able to show the user which books they have checked out, and to do this they need to know that this user is the same user who checked out those books. Websites typically use cookies to implement this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User recognition is the act of realizing that an identity belongs to the same person as another identity observed previously. Websites often have a legitimate need to recognize users. For example, a library website needs to be able to show the user which books they have checked out, and to do this they need to know that this user is the same user who checked out those books. Websites typically use cookies to implement this.
```

### Tracking techniques

Websites can use various techniques to track users. The W3C document [Unsanctioned Web Tracking](https://www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/unsanctioned-tracking/) distinguishes two categories of technique:

1. Those that are based on explicit web standards, such as cookies or other client-side storage APIs.
2. Those that are not, such as {{glossary("fingerprinting")}}, that typically exploit information leaked by unrelated Web APIs. This second category constitutes _unsanctioned tracking_.

**Websites should only use techniques in the first category to track users.** The reason for this is that techniques in the first category are visible and can be controlled by users, either directly in the browser or through extensions. For example, a user can see which cookies they have and can clear them, or an extension can automatically clear cookies in certain situations.

Even when individual users don't take advantage of these controls, privacy researchers and advocates can identify and highlight tracking which uses these explicit techniques. This helps the development of tools and regulations that can help protect the privacy of all users.

> Unsanctioned tracking is also sometimes called _covert tracking_ to emphasise that it is hidden from user visibility and control.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unsanctioned tracking is also sometimes called _covert tracking_ to emphasize that it is hidden from user visibility and control.
```

### Cross-context tracking

> Recognition may connect observations in the same context or may connect observations in different contexts. A _context_ is defined subjectively as an environment which users consider to be different from other contexts.

Reviewer: I'm not sure the second sentence here is very helpful — you are defining a context in terms of a context. Maybe talk about a context being broadly defined as a user session on a single website, or a session shared across a collection of related digital properties (sites, apps, etc.)

I'm not even sure session is the right word to use, as that is a loaded term, but I think something a bit more descriptive is needed here.

Author: Yes, this is tricky. The definition is from the [Privacy Principles doc](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/#context): 

> A context is a physical or digital environment in which [people](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/#dfn-individual) interact with other [actors](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/#dfn-actor), and which the [people](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/#dfn-individual) understand as distinct from other [contexts](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/#dfn-context).

It's not circular, but it is subjective. But AIUI this is by design: since privacy relates to how a user intends/expects their data to be shared, it is informed by how a user understands the environments that they are in.

I suppose, concretely, this tries to capture something like: a user might understand "interacting with their bank" as a single context, even if it might involve interacting with multiple sites (mybank.example.ca, mybank.example.com), and so tracking across these sites might not be considered cross-context tracking.

> Maybe talk about a context being broadly defined as a user session on a single website, or a session shared across a collection of related digital properties (sites, apps, etc.)

I think "session" is going to be confusing, apart from it having a somewhat well-defined meaning elsewhere, but it's not very descriptive - "a context is a session", OK, but what's a session?

Author: Maybe just adding something like my example could help to clarify?

```suggestion
Recognition may connect observations in the same context or may connect observations in different contexts. A _context_ is defined subjectively as an environment which users consider to be different from other contexts. For example, a user might think of "interacting with my bank" as a single context, even if it might involve interacting with multiple ((glossary("site", "sites")}} (for example, `my-bank.example.co.uk`, `my-bank.example.com`).
```

?

Reviewer: Yup, this makes more sense with the clarifying example. Definitely add.

Reviewer 3: Agree. I was reading line 102 (a user might interpret two sites as a single context) and was going to suggest adding an example of a store and a payment gateway hosted by a third party. So, yes! Either here, or there, or in both places.

Author: Yeah, I agree it fits better in the second place -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/bd2d0b42ad036a80806d547737404c6d95b5fe1a.

Typically, a context maps to a {{glossary("site")}}, so:

- A site understanding that two separate requests to itself are from the same user typically represents same-context recognition.
- A site understanding that a request to itself is from the same user as a request to a different site typically represents cross-context recognition.

However, this isn't necessarily the case, because the definition of a context is subjective: a user might interpret two sites as a single context.

To respect a user's privacy, **sites should avoid cross-context tracking unless the user intends for it to happen and can control whether it does**.

> A good example of a situation in which cross-context tracking is legitimate is [federated login](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Authentication/Federated_identity), in which a third-party {{glossary("identity provider")}} needs to recognise a user who is trying to sign into a different site. In this situation, the user intends for the third party to recognise them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A good example of a situation in which cross-context tracking is legitimate is [federated login](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Authentication/Federated_identity), in which a third-party {{glossary("identity provider")}} needs to recognize a user who is trying to sign into a different site. In this situation, the user intends for the third party to recognize them.
```

Reviewer: Also, worth mentioning third-party cookies here, or too much information for this stage?

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/556a3f73dd0cdb76575e2472d800a1b29e677e3d

### Tracking prevention in web browsers

Most web browsers implement some form of tracking prevention. Although the details are not always the same, tracking prevention policies broadly follow the principles outlined above. That is, browsers try to prevent unsanctioned tracking as much as possible, and all cross-context tracking, except in specific legitimate cases.

This means that, by following the principles listed above, sites can ensure that they work in as many browsers as possible.

## See also

> - [Privacy principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/#dfn-context) (W3C)

Reviewer: Google's [Learn Privacy](https://web.dev/learn/privacy) course, written by Stuart Langridge, is worth a link here, imo.

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/7804c0878a02d7f9fae3e1fd5ad12ecfbf378321

Reviewer: Perfect.

---
title: Privacy primer
slug: Web/Privacy/Privacy_primer
page-type: guide
sidebar: privacy
---

This guide is an introduction to privacy for web developers. It provides an overview of the principles that a website needs to follow in order to respect the privacy of its users.

It is largely based on the principles listed in the [W3C Privacy Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/) statement, but unlike that document, this guide covers only principles that apply to web developers, not those that apply to browser developers or standards designers.

It's split into two main sections:

- [Working with a user's personal data](#working_with_personal_data)
- [User recognition and tracking](#user_recognition_and_tracking)

> ## Working with personal data

Reviewer 3: Everything in this section is required by GDPR. We ought to mention that (and link to the GDPR page)

US federal law does not require a privacy policy, but if a site has a privacy policy, it must be honored.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) prohibits "unfair or deceptive acts or practices." So, while it does not require having a privacy policy, if you have a privacy policy, you must honor it, otherwise it constitutes a "deceptive practice."

Author: I don't want this article to talk about what's required in various regulations, that's for the regulations pages.

But I did add https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/2b3040e0e4c5c9c040ead859bf81aca5a5211fbc, which says that a lot of the things we talk about in this article as a whole are probably required by various laws.

> Websites often have a legitimate need to collect and process a user's personal data. To be respectful of a user's privacy, a website must align the data they collect and the way they use it with the user's intentions. That is, they should only collect data that the user intends to share, and they should only use it in the way that the user intends for it to be used.

Reviewer 3: We are using "should". Let's explain why developers should.  Maybe something to the effect of "This is both best practices and, in many cases, [the law](link to legislation landing page),"  or just linking to the landing page (where we state the above). 

The UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that privacy is a right. not sure if that is an argument we should include. 
https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights - under article 12.

Author: > We are using "should". Let's explain why developers should.

Well, the narrow "why" - "why should they only collect data that the user intends to share...", is "in order to respect a user's privacy", and we say that here.

The broader "why" sitting behind that "why should they respect a user's privacy" is missing from this page, but doesn't belong in this section. But maybe this means we ought to have a top-level section or an intro on this "why" that could also refer to regulatory requirements.

Author: So I had a go at this in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/44877/commits/2b3040e0e4c5c9c040ead859bf81aca5a5211fbc.

### Personal data

> Personal data is defined in the [General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)](https://gdpr.eu/article-4-definitions/) as:

Reviewer 3: As we are adding a GDPR article, we should link to it.
We might want to alter the sentence a teeny bit to be able to link to the dictionary of privacy terms.

- Withdraw any consent that they have given about how their data should be used.

Websites should make it as easy for users to perform these actions as it is for them to share their data in the first place. That is, websites should not make it easy for users to share data but hard for them to delete it.

Websites should not retaliate against users who exercise these rights. For example, if a user withdraws consent to the use of their data, and the website then denies access to a service that does not depend on that data, this could be considered retaliation.

### Publishing a privacy policy

Websites should publish a privacy policy to help users understand how the site will use their data. The policy should describe:

- What personal data the site collects.
- How the data will be used.
- Steps the site takes to protect data from unauthorized access.
- Any third parties with which the site will share the data, including a declaration that the site will ask for user consent before sharing.
- The duration for which the site will keep the data before it is deleted.
- How the user can view and manage their data.

## User recognition and tracking

> User recognition is the act of realizing that an identity belongs to the same person as another identity observed previously. Websites often have a legitimate need to recognize users. For example, a library website needs to be able to show the user which books they have checked out, and to do this they need to know that this user is the same user who checked out those books. Websites typically use cookies to implement this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**User recognition** is the act of realizing that an identity belongs to the same person as another identity observed previously. Websites often have a legitimate need to recognize users. For example, a library website needs to be able to show the user which books they have checked out, and to do this they need to know that this user is the same user who checked out those books. Websites typically use [cookies](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Cookies) to implement this.
```
MDN norm is to bold main definitions

cookies can also link to `/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Cookies` instead

Author: Yeah, I like the guide page better.

Recognizing a user is sometimes called _tracking_ a user.

### Tracking techniques

Websites can use various techniques to track users. The W3C document [Unsanctioned Web Tracking](https://www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/unsanctioned-tracking/) distinguishes two categories of technique:

> 1. Those that are based on explicit web standards, such as cookies or other client-side storage APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Those that are based on explicit web standards, such as [cookies](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Cookies) or other [client-side storage APIs](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API).
```

2. Those that are not, such as {{glossary("fingerprinting")}}, that typically exploit information leaked by unrelated Web APIs. This second category constitutes _unsanctioned tracking_.

> **Websites should only use techniques in the first category to track users.** The reason for this is that techniques in the first category are visible and can be controlled by users, either directly in the browser or through extensions. For example, a user can see which cookies they have and can clear them, or an extension can automatically clear cookies in certain situations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Websites should **only use techniques in the first category** to track users. The reason for this is that techniques in the first category are visible and can be controlled by users, either directly in the browser or through extensions. For example, a user can see which cookies have been set and can clear them, or an extension can automatically block cookies or clear cookies in certain situations.
```
Reducing the bold content to be a directive: "you do this!!!!" (and make it look less like a heading for the paragraph). But this is a primer, and not a how to guide, so definitely not offended if you disagree.

Author: I removed "or intervals" because it felt ungrammatical ("in...intervals"),

> Even when individual users don't take advantage of these controls, privacy researchers and advocates can identify and highlight tracking which uses these explicit techniques. This helps the development of tools and regulations that can help protect the privacy of all users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even when individual users don't take advantage of these controls, privacy researchers and advocates can identify and highlight tracking which uses these explicit techniques. This helps the development of tools and [regulations](/en-US/docs/Web/Privacy/Legislation) that can help protect the privacy of all users.
```
link is not yet written or live, but we should link this spot when it is

Author: Let's update this when we have merged the regulations pages.

Unsanctioned tracking is also sometimes called _covert tracking_ to emphasize that it is hidden from user visibility and control.

### Cross-context tracking

Recognition may connect observations in the same context or may connect observations in different contexts. A _context_ is defined subjectively as an environment which users consider to be different from other contexts.

Typically, a context maps to a {{glossary("site")}}, so:

- A site understanding that two separate requests to itself are from the same user typically represents same-context recognition.
- A site understanding that a request to itself is from the same user as a request to a different site typically represents cross-context recognition.

> However, this isn't necessarily the case, because the definition of a context is subjective: a user might interpret two sites as a single context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, this isn't necessarily the case, because the definition of a context is subjective: a user might interpret two sites, such as an online-store and it's branded third party payment gateway as a single context.
```
